---
title: Manufacturer Usage Description Specification
abbrev: Manufacturer Usage Descriptions
docname: draft-ietf-opsawg-mud-24
category: std

ipr: trust200902
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: E. Lear
    name: Eliot Lear
    org: Cisco Systems
    street: Richtistrasse 7
    code: CH-8304
    city: Wallisellen
    country: Switzerland
    phone: +41 44 878 9200
    email: lear@cisco.com
 -
    ins: R. Droms
    name: Ralph Droms
    org: Google
    street: 355 Main St., 5th Floor
    city: Cambridge
    state:
    phone: +1 978 376 3731
    email: rdroms@gmail.com
 -
    ins: D. Romascanu
    name: Dan Romascanu
    phone: +972 54 5555347
    email: dromasca@gmail.com

normative:
   RFC1123:
   RFC2119:
   RFC2818:
   RFC3629:
   RFC3748:
   RFC3986:
   RFC3987:
   I-D.ietf-netmod-acl-model:
   RFC5905:
   RFC6991:
   RFC2131:
   RFC3315:
   RFC7227:
   RFC7230:
   RFC7610:
   RFC7950:
   RFC7951:
   RFC7120:
   RFC5234:
   RFC5280:
   RFC5652:
   RFC5911:
   RFC5912:
   RFC6335:
   RFC8174:
   RFC8259:
   RFC8340:
   RFC8348:
   IEEE8021AB:
      title: IEEE Standard for Local and  Metropolitan Area Networks--
             Station and Media Access Control Connectivity Discovery
      author:
        organization: Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers
      seriesInfo:
        name: IEEE
        value: 802.1AB

informative:
   RFC1984:
   RFC3339:
   RFC3553:
   RFC6092:
   RFC6872:
   RFC7042:
   RFC7170:
   RFC7452:
   RFC7488:
   RFC8343:
   RFC7252:
   ISO.8601.1988:
   I-D.ietf-netmod-rfc6087bis:
   IEEE8021AR:
      title: Secure Device Identity
      author:
        organization: Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers
      seriesInfo:
        name: IEEE
        value: 802.1AR
      date: 1998
   IEEE8021X:
      title: IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area 
             networks--Port-Based Network Access Control
      author:
        organization: Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers
      seriesInfo:
        name: IEEE
        value: 802.1X
      date: 2010
   IEEE8021AE:
      title: IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks-
             Media Access Control (MAC) Security
      author:
        organization: Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers
      seriesInfo:
        name: IEEE
        value: 802.1AE
      date: 2006
   IEEE80211i:
      title: IEEE Standard for information
             technology-Telecommunications and information exchange
             between systems-Local and metropolitan area
             networks-Specific requirements-Part 11- Wireless LAN
             Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY)
             specifications- Amendment 6- Medium Access Control (MAC)
             Security Enhancements
      author:
        organization: Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers
      seriesInfo:
        name: IEEE
        value: 802.11i
      date: 2004
   FW95:
      title: Building Internet Firewalls
      author:
         -
          name: D. Brent Chapman
          ins: D.B. Chapman
         -
          name: Elizabeth Zwicky
          ins: E. Zwicky
      date: 11-1995

--- abstract

This memo specifies a component-based architecture for manufacturer
usage descriptions (MUD). The goal of MUD is to provide a means for
end devices to signal to the network what sort of access and network
functionality they require to properly function.  The initial focus is
on access control.  Later work can delve into other aspects.

This memo specifies two YANG modules, IPv4 and IPv6 DHCP options, an
LLDP TLV, a URL, an X.509 certificate extension and a means to sign
and verify the descriptions.

--- middle

Introduction
============

The Internet has largely been constructed for general purpose
computers, those devices that may be used for a purpose that is
specified by those who own the device.  {{RFC1984}} presumed that an
end device would be most capable of protecting itself.  This made
sense when the typical device was a workstation or a mainframe, and it
continues to make sense for general purpose computing devices today,
including laptops, smart phones, and tablets.

{{RFC7452}} discusses design patterns for, and poses questions about,
smart objects.  Let us then posit a group of objects that are
specifically not intended to be used for general purpose computing
tasks.  These devices, which this memo refers to as Things, have a
specific purpose.  By definition, therefore, all other uses are not
intended.  If a small number of communication patterns follows from
those small number of uses, the combination of these two statements
can be restated as a manufacturer usage description (MUD) that can be
applied at various points within a network.  MUD primarily addresses
threats to the device rather than the device as a threat.  In some
circumstances, however, MUD may offer some protection in the latter
case, depending on the MUD-URL is communicated, and how devices and
their communications are authenticated.

We use the notion of "manufacturer" loosely in this context to refer
to the entity or organization that will state how a device is intended
to be used.  For example, in the context of a lightbulb, this might
indeed be the lightbulb manufacturer.  In the context of a smarter
device that has a built in Linux stack, it might be an integrator of
that device.  The key points are that the device itself is assumed to
serve a limited purpose, and that there exists an organization in
the supply chain of that device that will take responsibility for
informing the network about that purpose.

The intent of MUD is to provide the following:

 * Substantially reduce the threat surface on a device to those
   communications intended by the manufacturer.

 * Provide a means to scale network policies to the ever-increasing
number of types of devices in the network.
 * Provide a means to address at least some vulnerabilities in a way
that is faster than the time it might take to update systems.  This will be
particularly true for systems that are no longer supported.
 * Keep the cost of implementation of such a system to the bare minimum.
 * Provide a means of extensibility for manufacturers to express other
   device capabilities or requirements.

MUD consists of three architectural building blocks:

 * A URL that can be used to locate a description;
 * The description itself, including how it is interpreted, and;
 * A means for local network management systems to retrieve the description.

MUD is most effective when the network is able to identify in some way
the remote endpoints that Things will talk to.

In this specification we describe each of these building blocks and how
they are intended to be used together.  However, they may also be used
separately, independent of this specification, by local deployments
for their own purposes.


What MUD Doesn't Do
-------------------
MUD is not intended to address network authorization of general
purpose computers, as their manufacturers cannot envision a specific
communication pattern to describe.  In addition, even those devices
that have a single or small number of uses might have very broad
communication patterns.  MUD on its own is not for them either.

Although MUD can provide network administrators with some additional
protection when device vulnerabilities exist, it will never replace the
need for manufacturers to patch vulnerabilities.

Finally, no matter what the manufacturer specifies in a MUD file,
these are not directives, but suggestions.  How they are instantiated
locally will depend on many factors and will be ultimately up to the
local network administrator, who must decide what is appropriate in
a given circumstances.


A Simple Example
----------------
A light bulb is intended to light a room.  It may be remotely
controlled through the network, and it may make use of a rendezvous
service of some form that an application on a smart phone.  What we can
say about that light bulb, then, is that all other network access is
unwanted.  It will not contact a news service, nor speak to the
refrigerator, and it has no need of a printer or other devices.  It
has no social networking friends.  Therefore, an access list applied
to it that states that it will only connect to the single rendezvous
service will not impede the light bulb in performing its function,
while at the same time allowing the network to provide both it and
other devices an additional layer of protection.


Terminology
-----------

MUD:
: manufacturer usage description.

MUD file:
: a file containing YANG-based JSON that describes a Thing and associated suggested specific network behavior.

MUD file server:
: a web server that hosts a MUD file.

MUD manager:
: the system that requests and receives the MUD file from the MUD
server.  After it has processed a MUD file, it may direct changes to
relevant network elements.

MUD controller:
: a synonym that has been used in the past for MUD manager.

MUD URL:
: a URL that can be used by the MUD manager to receive the MUD file.

Thing:
: the device emitting a MUD URL.

Manufacturer:
: the entity that configures the Thing to emit the MUD URL and the one
who asserts a recommendation in a MUD file.  The manufacturer
might not always be the entity that constructs a Thing.  It could,
for instance, be a systems integrator, or even a component provider.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED",
"MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in BCP 14 {{RFC2119}} {{RFC8174}} when, and only when, they
appear in all capitals, as shown here.


Determining Intended Use
------------------------
The notion of intended use is in itself not new.  Network
administrators apply access lists every day to allow for only such
use.  This notion of white listing was well described by Chapman and
Zwicky in {{FW95}}.  Profiling systems that make use of heuristics
to identify types of systems have existed for years as well.

A Thing could just as easily tell the network what sort of access it
requires without going into what sort of system it is.  This would, in
effect, be the converse of {{RFC7488}}.  In seeking a general
solution, however, we assume that a device will implement
functionality necessary to fulfill its limited purpose.  This is basic
economic constraint.  Unless the network would refuse access to such a
device, its developers would have no reason to provide the network any
information.  To date, such an assertion has held true.

Finding A Policy: The MUD URL
-----------------------------

Our work begins with the device emitting a Universal
Resource Locator (URL) {{RFC3986}}.  This URL serves both to
classify the device type and to provide a means to locate a policy
file.

MUD URLs MUST use the HTTPS scheme {{!RFC7230}}.

In this memo three means are defined to emit the MUD URL, as follows:

 * A DHCP option{{RFC2131}},{{RFC3315}} that the DHCP client uses to
   inform the DHCP server.  The DHCP server may take further actions,
   such as act as the MUD manager or otherwise pass the MUD URL along
   to the MUD manager.

 * An X.509 constraint.  The IEEE has developed {{IEEE8021AR}} that
   provides a certificate-based approach to communicate device characteristics,
   which itself relies on {{RFC5280}}.  The MUD URL extension is
   non-critical, as required by IEEE 802.1AR. Various means may be used
   to communicate that certificate, including Tunnel Extensible
   Authentication Protocol (TEAP) {{RFC7170}}.
 * Finally, a Link Layer Discovery Protocol (LLDP) frame is defined {{IEEE8021AB}}.

It is possible that there may be other means for a MUD URL to be
learned by a network.  For instance, some devices may already be
fielded or have very limited ability to communicate a MUD URL, and yet
can be identified through some means, such as a serial number or a
public key.  In these cases, manufacturers may be able to map those
identifiers to particular MUD URLs (or even the files themselves).
Similarly, there may be alternative resolution mechanisms available
for situations where Internet connectivity is limited or does not
exist.  Such mechanisms are not described in this memo, but are
possible.  Implementors are encouraged to allow for this sort of
flexibility of how MUD URLs may be learned.

Processing of the MUD URL
-------------------------

MUD managers that are able to do so SHOULD retrieve MUD URLs and
signature files as per {{!RFC7230}}, using the GET method {{!RFC7231}}.
They MUST validate the certificate using the rules in {{!RFC2818}},
Section 3.1.

Requests for MUD URLs SHOULD include an "Accept" header ({{!RFC7231}},
Section 5.3.2) containing "application/mud+json", an "Accept-Language"
header field ({{!RFC7231}}, Section 5.3.5), and a "User-Agent" header
({{!RFC7231}}, Section 5.5.3).

MUD managers SHOULD automatically process 3xx response status codes.

If a MUD manager is not able to fetch a MUD URL, other means MAY
be used to import MUD files and associated signature files.  So long
as the signature of the file can be validated, the file can be used.
In such environments, controllers SHOULD warn administrators when
cache-validity expiry is approaching so that they may check for new
files.

It may not be possible for a MUD manager to retrieve a MUD file at any
given time.  Should a MUD manager fail to retrieve a MUD file, it
SHOULD consider the existing one safe to use, at least for a time.
After some period, it SHOULD log that it has been unable to retrieve
the file.  There may be very good reasons for such failures, including
the possibility that the MUD manager is in an off-line environment,
the local Internet connection has failed, or the remote Internet
connection has failed.  It is also possible that an attacker is
attempting to interfere with the deployment of a device.  It is a
local decision as to how to handle such circumstances.

Types of Policies
-----------------

When the MUD URL is resolved, the MUD manager retrieves a file that
describes what sort of communications a device is designed to have.
The manufacturer may specify either specific hosts for cloud based
services or certain classes for access within an operational network.
An example of a class might be "devices of a specified manufacturer
type", where the manufacturer type itself is indicated simply by the
authority component (e.g, the domain name) of the MUD URL.  Another
example might be to allow or disallow local access.  Just like other
policies, these may be combined.  For example:

 * Allow access to devices of the same manufacturer
 * Allow access to and from controllers via Constrained Application
   Protocol (COAP){{RFC7252}}
 * Allow access to local DNS/NTP
 * Deny all other access

A printer might have a description that states:

 * Allow access for port IPP or port LPD
 * Allow local access for port HTTP
 * Deny all other access

In this way anyone can print to the printer, but local access would
be required for the management interface.

The files that are retrieved are intended to be closely aligned to
existing network architectures so that they are easy to deploy.  We
make use of YANG {{RFC7950}} because it provides accurate and adequate
models for use by network devices.  JSON{{RFC8259}} is used as a serialization
format for compactness and readability, relative to XML.  Other formats may
be chosen with later versions of MUD.

While the policy examples given here focus on access control, this is
not intended to be the sole focus.  By structuring the model described
in this document with clear extension points, other
descriptions could be included.  One that often comes to mind is
quality of service.

The YANG modules specified here are extensions of
{{I-D.ietf-netmod-acl-model}}.  The extensions to this model allow for
a manufacturer to express classes of systems that a manufacturer would
find necessary for the proper function of the device.  Two modules are
specified. The first module specifies a means for domain names to be
used in ACLs so that devices that have their controllers in the cloud
may be appropriately authorized with domain names, where the mapping
of those names to addresses may rapidly change.

The other module abstracts away IP addresses into certain classes that
are instantiated into actual IP addresses through local processing.
Through these classes, manufacturers can specify how the device is
designed to communicate, so that network elements can be configured by
local systems that have local topological knowledge.  That is, the
deployment populates the classes that the manufacturer specifies.  The
abstractions below map to zero or more hosts, as follows:


Manufacturer:
: A device made by a particular manufacturer, as identified by the authority
  component of its MUD URL

same-manufacturer:
: Devices that have the same authority component of their MUD URL.

controller:
: Devices that the local network administrator admits to the particular class.

my-controller:
: Devices intended to serve as controllers for the MUD-URL that the Thing emitted.  

local:
: The class of IP addresses that are scoped within some administrative boundary.
By default it is suggested that this be the local subnet.

The "manufacturer" classes can be easily specified by the
manufacturer, whereas controller classes are initially envisioned to
be specified by the administrator.

Because manufacturers do not know who will be using their devices, it
is important for functionality referenced in usage descriptions to be
relatively ubiquitous and mature.  For these reasons the YANG-based
configuration in a MUD file is limited to either the modules specified
or referenced in this document, or those specified in documented
extensions.

The Manufacturer Usage Description Architecture
-----------------------------------------------

With these components laid out we now have the basis for an
architecture.  This leads us to ASCII art.

~~~~~~~~~~
 .......................................
 .                      ____________   .           _____________
 .                     |            |  .          |             |
 .                     |    MUD     |-->get URL-->|   MUD       |
 .                     |  Manager   |  .(https)   | File Server |
 .  End system network |____________|<-MUD file<-<|_____________|
 .                             .       .
 .                             .       .
 . _______                 _________   .
 .|       |  (dhcp et al) | router  |  .
 .| Thing |---->MUD URL-->|   or    |  .
 .|_______|               | switch  |  .
 .                        |_________|  .
 .......................................
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #fig1 title="MUD Architecture"}

In the above diagram, the switch or router collects MUD URLs and
forwards them to the MUD manager (a network management system) for
processing.  This happens in different ways, depending on how the URL
is communicated.  For instance, in the case of DHCP, the DHCP server
might receive the URL and then process it.  In the case of IEEE 802.1X
{{IEEE8021X}}, the switch would carry the URL via a certificate to the
authentication server via EAP over Radius{{RFC3748}}, which would then
process it.  One method to do this is TEAP, described in {{RFC7170}}.
The certificate extension is described below.

The information returned by the MUD file server is valid for as long
as the Thing is connected.  There is no expiry.  However, if the MUD
manager has detected that the MUD file for a Thing has changed, it
SHOULD update the policy expeditiously, taking into account whatever
approval flow is required in a deployment.  In this way, new
recommendations from the manufacturer can be processed in a timely
fashion.


The information returned by the MUD file server (a web server) is
valid for the duration of the Thing's connection, or as specified in
the description.  Thus if the Thing is disconnected, any associated
configuration in the switch can be removed.  Similarly, from time to
time the description may be refreshed, based on new capabilities or
communication patterns or vulnerabilities.

The web server is typically run by or on behalf of the manufacturer.
Its domain name is that of the authority found in the MUD URL.  For
legacy cases where Things cannot emit a URL, if the switch is able to
determine the appropriate URL, it may proxy it.  In the trivial case
it may hardcode MUD-URL on a switch port or a map from some
available identifier such as an L2 address or certificate hash to a
MUD-URL.

The role of the MUD manager in this environment is to do the
following:

 * receive MUD URLs,
 * fetch MUD files,
 * translate abstractions in the MUD files to specific network element
   configuration,
 * maintain and update any required mappings of the abstractions, and
 * update network elements with appropriate configuration.

A MUD manager may be a component of a AAA or network management
system. Communication within those systems and from those systems to
network elements is beyond the scope of this memo.

Order of operations
-------------------
As mentioned above, MUD contains architectural building blocks, and so
order of operation may vary.  However, here is one clear intended
example:

1.  Thing emits URL.
2.  That URL is forwarded to a MUD manager by the nearest switch
    (how this happens depends on the way in which the MUD URL is emitted).
3.  The MUD manager retrieves the MUD file and signature from the MUD file
    server, assuming it doesn't already have copies.  After validating
    the signature, it may test the
    URL against a web or domain reputation service, and it may test any hosts within
    the file against those reputation services, as it deems fit.
4.  The MUD manager may query the administrator for permission to
    add the Thing and associated policy.  If the Thing is known or
    the Thing type is known, it may skip this step.
5.  The MUD manager instantiates local configuration based on
    the abstractions defined in this document.
6.  The MUD manager configures the switch nearest the Thing.
    Other systems may be configured as well.
7.  When the Thing disconnects, policy is removed.


The MUD Model and Semantic Meaning
==================================

A MUD file consists of a YANG model instance that has been serialized in JSON
{{RFC7951}}.  For purposes of MUD, the nodes that can be modified are
access lists as augmented by this model.  The MUD file is limited to
the serialization of only the following YANG schema:

 * ietf-access-control-list {{I-D.ietf-netmod-acl-model}}
 * ietf-mud (this document)
 * ietf-acldns (this document)

Extensions may be used to add additional schema.  This is described
further on.

To provide the widest possible deployment, publishers of MUD files
SHOULD make use of the abstractions in this memo and avoid the use of
IP addresses.  A MUD manager SHOULD NOT automatically implement any
MUD file that contains IP addresses, especially those that might have
local significance.  The addressing of one side of an access list is
implicit, based on whether it is applied as to-device-policy or
from-device-policy.

With the exceptions of "name" of the ACL, "type", "name" of the ACE, and TCP
and UDP source and destination port information, publishers of MUD
files SHOULD limit the use of ACL model leaf nodes expressed to those
found in this specification.  Absent any extensions, MUD files are
assumed to implement only the following ACL model features:

 * match-on-ipv4, match-on-ipv6, match-on-tcp,
   match-on-udp, match-on-icmp

Furthermore, only "accept" or "drop" actions SHOULD be included.  A
MUD manager MAY choose to interpret "reject" as "drop".  A MUD
manager SHOULD ignore all other actions.  This is because
manufacturers do not have sufficient context within a local deployment
to know whether reject is appropriate.  That is a decision that should
be left to a network administrator.

Given that MUD does not deal with interfaces, the support of the
"ietf-interfaces" module {{RFC8343}} is not required. Specifically,
the support of interface-related features and branches (e.g.,
interface-attachment and interface-stats) of the ACL YANG module is
not required.

In fact, MUD managers MAY ignore any particular component of a
description or MAY ignore the description in its entirety, and SHOULD
carefully inspect all MUD descriptions.  Publishers of MUD files MUST
NOT include other nodes except as described in {{extensions}}.  See
that section for more information.

The IETF-MUD YANG Module
------------------------

This module is structured into three parts:

 * The first component, the "mud" container, holds information that is
   relevant to retrieval and validity of the MUD file itself, as well
   as policy intended to and from the Thing.

 * The second component augments the matching container of the ACL
   model to add several nodes that are relevant to the MUD URL, or
   otherwise abstracted for use within a local environment.

 * The third component  augments the tcp-acl container of the ACL
   model to add the ability to match on the direction of initiation of a
   TCP connection.

A valid MUD file will contain two root objects, a "mud" container and
an "acls" container.  Extensions may add additional root
objects as required.  As a reminder, when parsing acls,
elements within a "match" block are logically ANDed.  In general, a
single abstraction in a match statement should be used.  For instance,
it makes little sense to match both "my-controller" and "controller"
with an argument, since they are highly unlikely to be the same value.

A simplified graphical representation of the data models is used in
this document.  The meaning of the symbols in these diagrams is
explained in {{RFC8340}}.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

module: ietf-mud
  +--rw mud!
     +--rw mud-version           uint8
     +--rw mud-url               inet:uri
     +--rw last-update           yang:date-and-time
     +--rw mud-signature?        inet:uri
     +--rw cache-validity?       uint8
     +--rw is-supported          boolean
     +--rw systeminfo?           string
     +--rw mfg-name?             string
     +--rw model-name?           string
     +--rw firmware-rev?         string
     +--rw software-rev?         string
     +--rw documentation?        inet:uri
     +--rw extensions*           string
     +--rw from-device-policy
     |  +--rw acls
     |     +--rw access-list* [name]
     |        +--rw name    -> /acl:acls/acl/name
     +--rw to-device-policy
        +--rw acls
           +--rw access-list* [name]
              +--rw name    -> /acl:acls/acl/name

  augment /acl:acls/acl:acl/acl:aces/acl:ace/acl:matches:
    +--rw mud
       +--rw manufacturer?        inet:host
       +--rw same-manufacturer?   empty
       +--rw model?               inet:uri
       +--rw local-networks?      empty
       +--rw controller?          inet:uri
       +--rw my-controller?       empty
  augment
    /acl:acls/acl:acl/acl:aces/acl:ace/acl:matches
       /acl:l4/acl:tcp/acl:tcp:
    +--rw direction-initiated?   direction

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

MUD model definitions for the root mud container
================================================

mud-version
-----------
This node specifies the integer version of the MUD specification.  This memo
specifies version 1.


mud-url
-------
This URL identifies the MUD file.  This is useful when the file and
associated signature are manually uploaded, say, in an offline mode.



to-device-policy and from-device-policy containers
--------------------------------------------------
{{I-D.ietf-netmod-acl-model}} describes access-lists.  In the case of
MUD, a MUD file must be explicit in describing the communication
pattern of a Thing, and that includes indicating what is to be
permitted or denied in either direction of communication.  Hence each
of these containers indicates the appropriate direction of a flow in
association with a particular Thing.  They contain references to
specific access-lists.


last-update
-----------

This is a date-and-time value of when the MUD file was
generated.  This is akin to a version number.  Its form is taken from
{{RFC6991}} which, for those keeping score, in turn was taken from
Section 5.6 of {{RFC3339}}, which was taken from {{ISO.8601.1988}}.

cache-validity
--------------

This uint8 is the period of time in hours that a network management
station MUST wait since its last retrieval before checking for an
update.  It is RECOMMENDED that this value be no less than 24 and MUST
NOT be more than 168 for any Thing that is supported.  This period
SHOULD be no shorter than any period determined through HTTP caching
directives (e.g., "cache-control" or "Expires").  N.B., expiring of
this timer does not require the MUD manager to discard the MUD
file, nor terminate access to a Thing.  See {{secon}} for more
information.

is-supported
------------
This boolean is an indication from the manufacturer to the network
administrator as to whether or not the Thing is supported.  In this
context a Thing is said to not be supported if the manufacturer
intends never to issue a firmware or software update to the Thing or
never update the MUD file.  A MUD manager MAY still periodically check
for updates.

systeminfo
----------
This is a textual UTF-8 description of the Thing
to be connected.  The intent is for administrators to be able to see a
brief displayable description of the Thing.  It SHOULD NOT exceed 60
characters worth of display space.

mfg-name, software-rev, model-name firmware-rev
-------------------------------------------------------------
These optional fields are filled in as specified by
{{RFC8348}}.  Note that firmware-rev and software-rev
MUST NOT be populated in a MUD file if the device can be upgraded but
the MUD-URL cannot be.  This would be the case, for instance, with
MUD-URLs that are contained in 802.1AR certificates.

extensions
----------
This optional leaf-list names MUD extensions that are used in the MUD
file.  Note that MUD extensions MUST NOT be used in a MUD file without
the extensions being declared.  Implementations MUST ignore any node
in this file that they do not understand.

Note that extensions can either extend the MUD file as described in
the previous paragraph, or they might reference other work.  An
extension example can be found in {{extexample}}.

Augmentation to the ACL Model
=============================

Note that in this section, when we use the term "match" we are
referring to the ACL model "matches" node.

manufacturer
------------
This node consists of a hostname that would be matched against the
authority component of another Thing's MUD URL.  In its simplest form
"manufacturer" and "same-manufacturer" may be implemented as
access-lists. In more complex forms, additional network capabilities
may be used.  For example, if one saw the line
 "manufacturer" : "flobbidy.example.com", then all Things that
registered with a MUD URL that contained flobbity.example.com in its
authority section would match.

same-manufacturer
----------------
This null-valued node is an equivalent for when the manufacturer
element is used to indicate the authority that is found in another
Thing's MUD URL matches that of the authority found in this Thing's
MUD URL.  For example, if the Thing's MUD URL were
https://b1.example.com/ThingV1, then all devices
that had MUD URL with an authority section of b1.example.com would
match.

documentation
-------------
This URI consists of a URL that points to documentation relating to
the device and the MUD file.  This can prove particularly useful when
the "controller" class is used, so that its use can be explained.

model
-----
This string matches the entire MUD URL, thus covering the model that
is unique within the context of the authority.  It may contain not
only model information, but versioning information as well, and any
other information that the manufacturer wishes to add.  The intended
use is for devices of this precise class to match, to permit or
deny communication between one another.

local-networks
-------------
This null-valued node expands to include local networks.  Its
default expansion is that packets must not traverse toward a default
route that is received from the router.  However, administrators may
expand the expression as is appropriate in their deployments.

controller
----------
This URI specifies a value that a controller will register with the
MUD manager.  The node then is expanded to the set
of hosts that are so registered.  This node may also be a URN.  In
this case, the URN describes a well known service, such as DNS or
NTP, that has been standardized.  Both of those URNs may be found in
{{urns}}.

When "my-controller" is used, it is possible that the administrator
will be prompted to populate that class for each and every model.  Use
of "controller" with a named class allows the user to populate that
class only once for many different models that a manufacturer may
produce.

Controller URIs MAY take the form of a URL (e.g. "http\[s\]://").
However, MUD managers MUST NOT resolve and retrieve such files, and
it is RECOMMENDED that there be no such file at this time, as their
form and function may be defined at a point in the future.  For now,
URLs should serve simply as class names and may be populated by the
local deployment administrator.

Great care should be taken by MUD managers when invoking the
controller class in the form of URLs.  For one thing, it requires some
understanding by the administrator as to when it is appropriate.
Pre-registration in such classes by controllers with the MUD server is
encouraged.  The mechanism to do that is beyond the scope of this
work.

my-controller
-------------
This null-valued node signals to the MUD manager to use whatever
mapping it has for this MUD URL to a particular group of hosts.  This may
require prompting the administrator for class members.  Future work
should seek to automate membership management.

direction-initiated
-------------------
This MUST only be applied to TCP.  This matches the direction in which
a TCP connection is initiated.  When direction initiated is
"from-device", packets that are transmitted in the direction of a
thing MUST be dropped unless the thing has first initiated a TCP
connection.  By way of example, this node may be implemented in its
simplest form by looking at naked SYN bits, but may also be
implemented through more stateful mechanisms.

When applied this matches packets when the flow was initiated in the
corresponding direction.  {{RFC6092}} specifies IPv6 guidance best
practices.  While that document is scoped specifically to IPv6, its
contents are applicable for IPv4 as well.

Processing of the MUD file
==========================
To keep things relatively simple in addition to whatever definitions
exist, we also apply two additional default behaviors:

 * Anything not explicitly permitted is denied.
 * Local DNS and NTP are, by default, permitted to and from the
   Thing.

An explicit description of the defaults can be found in {{defaults}}.
These are applied AFTER all other explicit rules.  Thus, a default
behavior can be changed with a "drop" action.


What does a MUD URL look like? {#mudurl}
==============================

MUD URLs are required to use the HTTPS scheme, in order to establish the
MUD file server's identity and assure integrity of the MUD file.

Any "https://" URL can be a MUD URL. For example:

~~~
  https://things.example.org/product_abc123/v5
  https://www.example.net/mudfiles/temperature_sensor/
  https://example.com/lightbulbs/colour/v1
~~~

A manufacturer may construct a MUD URL in any way, so long as it makes
use of the "https" schema.


The MUD YANG Model
==================

~~~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>file "ietf-mud@2018-06-05.yang"
module ietf-mud {
  yang-version 1.1;
  namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-mud";
  prefix ietf-mud;

  import ietf-access-control-list {
    prefix acl;
  }
  import ietf-yang-types {
    prefix yang;
  }
  import ietf-inet-types {
    prefix inet;
  }

  organization
    "IETF OPSAWG (Ops Area) Working Group";
  contact
    "WG Web: http://tools.ietf.org/wg/opsawg/
     WG List: opsawg@ietf.org
     Author: Eliot Lear
     lear@cisco.com
     Author: Ralph Droms
     rdroms@gmail.com
     Author: Dan Romascanu
     dromasca@gmail.com
     
    ";
  description
    "This YANG module defines a component that augments the
     IETF description of an access list.  This specific module
     focuses on additional filters that include local, model,
     and same-manufacturer.

     This module is intended to be serialized via JSON and stored
     as a file, as described in RFC XXXX [RFC Editor to fill in with
     this document #].

     Copyright (c) 2016,2017 IETF Trust and the persons
     identified as the document authors.  All rights reserved.
     Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or
     without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject
     to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD
     License set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal
     Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
     (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
     This version of this YANG module is part of RFC XXXX; see
     the RFC itself for full legal notices.";

  revision 2018-06-05 {
    description
      "Initial proposed standard.";
    reference
      "RFC XXXX: Manufacturer Usage Description
       Specification";
  }

  typedef direction {
    type enumeration {
      enum to-device {
        description
          "packets or flows destined to the target
           Thing";
      }
      enum from-device {
        description
          "packets or flows destined from
           the target Thing";
      }
    }
    description
      "Which way are we talking about?";
  }

  container mud {
    presence "Enabled for this particular MUD URL";
    description
      "MUD related information, as specified
       by RFC-XXXX [RFC Editor to fill in].";
    uses mud-grouping;
  }

  grouping mud-grouping {
    description
      "Information about when support end(ed), and
       when to refresh";
    leaf mud-version {
      type uint8;
      mandatory true;
      description
        "This is the version of the MUD
         specification.  This memo specifies version 1.";
    }
    leaf mud-url {
      type inet:uri;
      mandatory true;
      description
        "This is the MUD URL associated with the entry found
         in a MUD file.";
    }
    leaf last-update {
      type yang:date-and-time;
      mandatory true;
      description
        "This is intended to be when the current MUD file
         was generated.  MUD Managers SHOULD NOT check
         for updates between this time plus cache validity";
    }
    leaf mud-signature {
      type inet:uri;
      description
        "A URI that resolves to a signature as
         described in this specification.";
    }
    leaf cache-validity {
      type uint8 {
        range "1..168";
      }
      units "hours";
      default "48";
      description
        "The information retrieved from the MUD server is
         valid for these many hours, after which it should
         be refreshed.  N.B. MUD manager implementations
         need not discard MUD files beyond this period.";
    }
    leaf is-supported {
      type boolean;
      mandatory true;
      description
        "This boolean indicates whether or not the Thing is
         currently supported by the manufacturer.";
    }
    leaf systeminfo {
      type string;
      description
        "A UTF-8 description of this Thing.  This
         should be a brief description that may be
         displayed to the user to determine whether
         to allow the Thing on the
         network.";
    }
    leaf mfg-name {
      type string;
      description
        "Manufacturer name, as described in
         the ietf-hardware YANG module.";
    }
    leaf model-name {
      type string;
      description
        "Model name, as described in the
         ietf-hardware YANG module.";
    }
    leaf firmware-rev {
      type string;
      description
        "firmware-rev, as described in the
         ietf-hardware YANG module.  Note this field MUST
         NOT be included when the device can be updated
         but the MUD-URL cannot.";
    }
    leaf software-rev {
      type string;
      description
        "software-rev, as described in the
         ietf-hardware YANG module.  Note this field MUST
         NOT be included when the device can be updated
         but the MUD-URL cannot.";
    }
    leaf documentation {
      type inet:uri;
      description
        "This URL points to documentation that
         relates to this device and any classes that it uses
         in its MUD file.  A caution: MUD managers need
         not resolve this URL on their own, but rather simply
         provide it to the administrator.  Parsing HTML is
         not an intended function of a MUD manager.";
    }
    leaf-list extensions {
      type string {
        length "1..40";
      }
      description
        "A list of extension names that are used in this MUD
         file.  Each name is registered with the IANA and
         described in an RFC.";
    }
    container from-device-policy {
      description
        "The policies that should be enforced on traffic
         coming from the device. These policies are not
         necessarily intended to be enforced at a single
         point, but may be rendered by the controller to any
         relevant enforcement points in the network or
         elsewhere.";
      uses access-lists;
    }
    container to-device-policy {
      description
        "The policies that should be enforced on traffic
         going to the device. These policies are not
         necessarily intended to be enforced at a single
         point, but may be rendered by the controller to any
         relevant enforcement points in the network or
         elsewhere.";
      uses access-lists;
    }
  }

  grouping access-lists {
    description
      "A grouping for access lists in the context of device
       policy.";
    container access-lists {
      description
        "The access lists that should be applied to traffic
           to or from the device.";
      list access-list {
        key "name";
        description
          "Each entry on this list refers to an ACL that
             should be present in the overall access list
             data model. Each ACL is identified by name and
             type.";
        leaf name {
          type leafref {
            path "/acl:acls/acl:acl/acl:name";
          }
          description
            "The name of the ACL for this entry.";
        }
      }
    }
  }

  augment "/acl:acls/acl:acl/acl:aces/acl:ace/acl:matches" {
    description
      "adding abstractions to avoid need of IP addresses";
    container mud {
      description
        "MUD-specific matches.";
      leaf manufacturer {
        type inet:host;
        description
          "A domain that is intended to match the authority
           section of the MUD URL. This node is used to specify
           one or more manufacturers a device should
           be authorized to access.";
      }
      leaf same-manufacturer {
        type empty;
        description
          "This node matches the authority section of the MUD URL
           of a Thing.  It is intended to grant access to all
           devices with the same authority section.";
      }
      leaf model {
        type inet:uri;
        description
          "Devices of the specified model type will match if
           they have an identical MUD URL.";
      }
      leaf local-networks {
        type empty;
        description
          "IP addresses will match this node if they are
           considered local addresses.  A local address may be
           a list of locally defined prefixes and masks
           that indicate a particular administrative scope.";
      }
      leaf controller {
        type inet:uri;
        description
          "This node names a class that has associated with it
           zero or more IP addresses to match against.  These
           may be scoped to a manufacturer or via a standard
           URN.";
      }
      leaf my-controller {
        type empty;
        description
          "This node matches one or more network elements that
           have been configured to be the controller for this
           Thing, based on its MUD URL.";
      }
    }
  }
  augment "/acl:acls/acl:acl/acl:aces/acl:ace/acl:matches" +
    "/acl:l4/acl:tcp/acl:tcp" {
    description
      "add direction-initiated";
    leaf direction-initiated {
      type direction;
      description
        "This node matches based on which direction a
         connection was initiated. The means by which that
         is determined is discussed in this document.";
    }
  }
}
<CODE ENDS>

~~~~~~~~~~


The Domain Name Extension to the ACL Model
==========================================

This module specifies an extension to IETF-ACL model such that domain
names may be referenced by augmenting the "matches" node.
Different implementations may deploy differing methods to maintain the
mapping between IP address and domain name, if indeed any are needed.
However, the intent is that resources that are referred to using a
name should be authorized (or not) within an access list.

The structure of the change is as follows:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

module: ietf-acldns
  augment /acl:acls/acl:acl/acl:aces/acl:ace/
    acl:matches/acl:l3/acl:ipv4/acl:ipv4:
    +--rw src-dnsname?   inet:host
    +--rw dst-dnsname?   inet:host
  augment /acl:acls/acl:acl/acl:aces/acl:ace/
    acl:matches/acl:l3/acl:ipv6/acl:ipv6:
    +--rw src-dnsname?   inet:host
    +--rw dst-dnsname?   inet:host

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The choice of these particular points in the access-list model is
based on the assumption that we are in some way referring to
IP-related resources, as that is what the DNS returns.  A domain name
in our context is defined in {{RFC6991}}. The augmentations are
replicated across IPv4 and IPv6 to allow MUD file authors the ability
to control the IP version that the Thing may utilize.

The following node are defined.

src-dnsname
--------------
The argument corresponds to a domain name of a source as specified by
inet:host.  A number of means may be used to resolve hosts.  What is
important is that such resolutions be consistent with ACLs required by
Things to properly operate.

dst-dnsname
-------------------
The argument corresponds to a domain name of a destination as
specified by inet:host  See the previous section relating to
resolution.

Note when using either of these with a MUD file, because access is
associated with a particular Thing, MUD files MUST NOT contain either
a src-dnsname in an ACL associated with from-device-policy or
a dst-dnsname associated with to-device-policy.

The ietf-acldns Model
--------------------------
~~~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>file "ietf-acldns@2018-06-05.yang"
module ietf-acldns {
  yang-version 1.1;
  namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-acldns";
  prefix ietf-acldns;

  import ietf-access-control-list {
    prefix acl;
  }
  import ietf-inet-types {
    prefix inet;
  }

  organization
    "IETF OPSAWG (Ops Area) Working Group";
  contact
    "WG Web: http://tools.ietf.org/wg/opsawg/
     WG List: opsawg@ietf.org
     Author: Eliot Lear
     lear@cisco.com
     Author: Ralph Droms
     rdroms@gmail.com
     Author: Dan Romascanu
     dromasca@gmail.com
    ";
  description
    "This YANG module defines a component that augments the
     IETF description of an access list to allow DNS names
     as matching criteria.";

  revision 2018-06-05 {
    description
      "Base version of dnsname extension of ACL model";
    reference
      "RFC XXXX: Manufacturer Usage Description
       Specification";
  }

  grouping dns-matches {
    description
      "Domain names for matching.";
    leaf src-dnsname {
      type inet:host;
      description
        "domain name to be matched against";
    }
    leaf dst-dnsname {
      type inet:host;
      description
        "domain name to be matched against";
    }
  }

  augment "/acl:acls/acl:acl/acl:aces/acl:ace/acl:matches" +
   "/acl:l3/acl:ipv4/acl:ipv4" {
    description
      "Adding domain names to matching";
    uses dns-matches;
  }
  augment "/acl:acls/acl:acl/acl:aces/acl:ace/acl:matches" +
   "/acl:l3/acl:ipv6/acl:ipv6" {
    description
      "Adding domain names to matching";
    uses dns-matches;
  }
}
<CODE ENDS>

~~~~~~~~~~

MUD File Example
================

This example contains two access lists that are intended to provide
outbound access to a cloud service on TCP port 443.

~~~~~~~

{
  "ietf-mud:mud": {
    "mud-version": 1,
    "mud-url": "https://lighting.example.com/lightbulb2000",
    "last-update": "2018-03-02T11:20:51+01:00",
    "cache-validity": 48,
    "is-supported": true,
    "systeminfo": "The BMS Example Lightbulb",
    "from-device-policy": {
      "access-lists": {
        "access-list": [
          {
            "name": "mud-76100-v6fr"
          }
        ]
      }
    },
    "to-device-policy": {
      "access-lists": {
        "access-list": [
          {
            "name": "mud-76100-v6to"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  },
  "ietf-access-control-list:acls": {
    "acl": [
      {
        "name": "mud-76100-v6to",
        "type": "ipv6-acl-type",
        "aces": {
          "ace": [
            {
              "name": "cl0-todev",
              "matches": {
                "ipv6": {
                  "ietf-acldns:src-dnsname": "test.example.com",
                  "protocol": 6
                },
                "tcp": {
                  "ietf-mud:direction-initiated": "from-device",
                  "source-port": {
                    "operator": "eq",
                    "port": 443
                  }
                }
              },
              "actions": {
                "forwarding": "accept"
              }
            }
          ]
        }
      },
      {
        "name": "mud-76100-v6fr",
        "type": "ipv6-acl-type",
        "aces": {
          "ace": [
            {
              "name": "cl0-frdev",
              "matches": {
                "ipv6": {
                  "ietf-acldns:dst-dnsname": "test.example.com",
                  "protocol": 6
                },
                "tcp": {
                  "ietf-mud:direction-initiated": "from-device",
                  "destination-port": {
                    "operator": "eq",
                    "port": 443
                  }
                }
              },
              "actions": {
                "forwarding": "accept"
              }
            }
          ]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}

~~~~~~~

In this example, two policies are declared, one from the Thing and
the other to the Thing.  Each policy names an access list that
applies to the Thing, and one that applies from.  Within each access
list, access is permitted to packets flowing to or from the Thing
that can be mapped to the domain name of "service.bms.example.com".
For each access list, the enforcement point should expect that the
Thing initiated the connection.


The MUD URL DHCP Option {#dhcpopt}
=======================

The IPv4 MUD URL client option has the following format:

~~~~~~~~~~

  +------+-----+------------------------------
  | code | len |  MUDstring
  +------+-----+------------------------------

~~~~~~~~~~


Code OPTION_MUD_URL_V4 (161) is assigned by IANA.  len is a single
octet that indicates the length of MUD string in octets.  The MUD
string is defined as follows:

~~~~~~~~~~~

 MUDstring = mudurl [ " " reserved ]
 mudurl = URI; a URL [RFC3986] that uses the "https" schema [RFC7230]
 reserved = 1*( OCTET ) ; from [RFC5234]

~~~~~~~~~~~

The entire option MUST NOT exceed 255 octets.  If a space follows the
MUD URL, a reserved string that will be defined in future
specifications follows.  MUD managers that do not understand this
field MUST ignore it.

The IPv6 MUD URL client option has the following format:

~~~~~~~~~~

   0                   1                   2                   3
   0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |         OPTION_MUD_URL_V6     |        option-length          |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                            MUDstring                          |
  |                                                               |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

~~~~~~~~~~

OPTION_MUD_URL_V6 (112; assigned by IANA).

option-length contains the length of the MUDstring, as defined above,
in octets.

The intent of this option is to provide both a new Thing classifier
to the network as well as some recommended configuration to the
routers that implement policy.  However, it is entirely the purview of
the network system as managed by the network administrator to decide
what to do with this information.  The key function of this option is
simply to identify the type of Thing to the network in a structured
way such that the policy can be easily found with existing toolsets.


Client Behavior
---------------
A DHCPv4 client MAY emit a DHCPv4 option and a DHCPv6 client MAY emit
DHCPv6 option.  These options are singletons, as specified in
{{RFC7227}}.  Because clients are intended to have at most one MUD URL
associated with them, they may emit at most one MUD URL option via
DHCPv4 and one MUD URL option via DHCPv6. In the case where both v4
and v6 DHCP options are emitted, the same URL MUST be used.

Server Behavior
---------------

A DHCP server may ignore these options or take action based on receipt
of these options.  When a server consumes this option, it will either
forward the URL and relevant client information (such as the gateway
address or giaddr and requested IP address, and lease length) to a
network management system, or it will retrieve the usage description
itself by resolving the URL.

DHCP servers may implement MUD functionality themselves or they may
pass along appropriate information to a network management system or
MUD manager.  A DHCP server that does process the MUD URL MUST adhere
to the process specified in {{RFC2818}} and {{RFC5280}} to validate
the TLS certificate of the web server hosting the MUD file.  Those
servers will retrieve the file, process it, create and install the
necessary configuration on the relevant network element.  Servers
SHOULD monitor the gateway for state changes on a given interface.  A
DHCP server that does not provide MUD functionality and has forwarded
a MUD URL to a MUD manager MUST notify the MUD manager
of any corresponding change to the DHCP state of the client
(such as expiration or explicit release of a network address lease).

Should the DHCP server fail, in the case when it implements the MUD
manager functionality, any backup mechanisms SHOULD include the MUD
state, and the server SHOULD resolve the status of clients upon its
restart, similar to what it would do, absent MUD manager
functionality.  In the case where the DHCP server forwards information
to the MUD manager, the MUD manager will either make use of
redundant DHCP servers for information, or otherwise clear state based
on other network information, such as monitoring port status on a
switch via SNMP, Radius accounting, or similar mechanisms.


Relay Requirements
------------------
There are no additional requirements for relays.

The Manufacturer Usage Description (MUD) URL X.509 Extension {#mudx509}
=======================================================================

This section defines an X.509 non-critical certificate extension that
contains a single Uniform Resource Locator (URL) that points to an
on-line Manufacturer Usage Description concerning the certificate
subject.  URI must be represented as described in Section 7.4 of {{RFC5280}}.

Any Internationalized Resource Identifiers (IRIs) MUST be mapped to
URIs as specified in Section 3.1 of {{RFC3987}} before they are placed
in the certificate extension.

The semantics of the URL are defined {{mudurl}} of this document.

The choice of id-pe is based on guidance found in Section 4.2.2 of
{{RFC5280}}:

~~~~~

      These extensions may be used to direct applications to on-line
      information about the issuer or the subject.

~~~~~

The MUD URL is precisely that: online information about the particular subject.

In addition, a separate new extension is defined as id-pe-mudsigner.
This contains the subject field of the signing certificate of the MUD
file.  Processing of this field is specified in {{validate}}.

The purpose of this signature is to make a claim that the MUD file
found on the server is valid for a given device, independent of any
other factors.  There are several security considerations below in
{{secon}}.

A new content-type id-ct-mud is also defined.  While signatures are
detached today, should a MUD file be transmitted as part of a CMS
message, this content-type SHOULD be used.

The new extension is identified as follows:

~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
   MUDURLExtnModule-2016 { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6)
                internet(1) security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7)
                id-mod(0) id-mod-mudURLExtn2016(88) }
    DEFINITIONS IMPLICIT TAGS ::= BEGIN

    -- EXPORTS ALL --

   IMPORTS

     -- RFC 5912
     EXTENSION
     FROM PKIX-CommonTypes-2009
          { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
            security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0)
            id-mod-pkixCommon-02(57) }

     -- RFC 5912
     id-ct
     FROM PKIXCRMF-2009
          { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
            security(5)  mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0)
            id-mod-crmf2005-02(55) }

     -- RFC 6268
     CONTENT-TYPE
     FROM CryptographicMessageSyntax-2010
       { iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) rsadsi(113549)
          pkcs(1) pkcs-9(9) smime(16) modules(0) id-mod-cms-2009(58) }

     -- RFC 5912
     id-pe, Name
     FROM PKIX1Explicit-2009
           { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
             security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0)
             id-mod-pkix1-explicit-02(51) } ;

    --
    -- Certificate Extensions
    --
      
    MUDCertExtensions EXTENSION ::=
       { ext-MUDURL | ext-MUDsigner, ... }

    ext-MUDURL EXTENSION ::=
       { SYNTAX MUDURLSyntax IDENTIFIED BY id-pe-mud-url }

    id-pe-mud-url OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-pe 25 }

    MUDURLSyntax ::= IA5String

    ext-MUDsigner EXTENSION ::=
       { SYNTAX MUDsignerSyntax IDENTIFIED BY id-pe-mudsigner }

    id-pe-mudsigner OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-pe TBD }

    MUDsignerSyntax ::= Name

    --
    -- CMS Content Types
    --

    MUDContentTypes CONTENT-TYPE ::=
       { ct-mud, ... }

     ct-mud CONTENT-TYPE ::=
       { -- directly include the content
         IDENTIFIED BY id-ct-mudtype }
       -- The binary data that is in the form 
       -- 'application/mud+json" is directly encoded as the
       -- signed data.  No additional ASN.1 encoding is added.

    id-ct-mudtype OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-ct TBD }

    END
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~

While this extension can appear in either an 802.AR manufacturer
certificate (IDevID) or deployment certificate (LDevID), of course it
is not guaranteed in either, nor is it guaranteed to be carried over.
It is RECOMMENDED that MUD manager implementations maintain a table
that maps a Thing to its MUD URL based on IDevIDs.


The Manufacturer Usage Description LLDP extension {#lldp}
=================================================


The IEEE802.1AB Link Layer Discovery Protocol (LLDP) is a
one hop vendor-neutral link layer protocol used by end hosts network
Things for advertising their identity, capabilities, and neighbors on
an IEEE 802 local area network. Its Type-Length-Value (TLV) design
allows for vendor-specific extensions to be defined. IANA has a
registered IEEE 802 organizationally unique identifier (OUI) defined
as documented in {{RFC7042}}. The MUD LLDP extension uses a subtype
defined in this document to carry the MUD URL.

The LLDP vendor specific frame has the following format:

~~~~~

+--------+--------+----------+---------+--------------
|TLV Type|  len   |   OUI    |subtype  | MUDString
|  =127  |        |= 00 00 5E|  = 1    |
|(7 bits)|(9 bits)|(3 octets)|(1 octet)|(1-255 octets)
+--------+--------+----------+---------+--------------

~~~~~

where:

 * TLV Type = 127 indicates a vendor-specific TLV
 * len  indicates the TLV string length
 * OUI = 00 00 5E is the organizationally unique identifier of IANA
 * subtype = 1 (to be assigned by IANA for the MUD URL)
 * MUD URL  the length MUST NOT exceed 255 octets

The intent of this extension is to provide both a new Thing
classifier to the network as well as some recommended configuration to
the routers that implement policy.  However, it is entirely the
purview of the network system as managed by the network administrator
to decide what to do with this information.  The key function of this
extension is simply to identify the type of Thing to the network in a
structured way such that the policy can be easily found with existing
toolsets.

Hosts, routers, or other network elements that implement this option
are intended to have at most one MUD URL associated with them, so they
may transmit at most one MUD URL value.

Hosts, routers, or other network elements that implement this option may
ignore these options or take action based on receipt of these options.
For example they may fill in information in the respective extensions
of the LLDP Management Information Base (LLDP MIB). LLDP operates in a
one-way direction. LLDPDUs are not exchanged as information requests
by one Thing and response sent by another Thing. The other Things do
not acknowledge LLDP information received from a Thing.  No specific
network behavior is guaranteed.  When a Thing consumes this extension,
it may either forward the URL and relevant remote Thing information to
a MUD manager, or it will retrieve the usage description by
resolving the URL in accordance with normal HTTP semantics.


Creating and Processing of Signed MUD Files
===========================================

Because MUD files contain information that may be used to configure
network access lists, they are sensitive.  To ensure that they have
not been tampered with, it is important that they be signed.  We make
use of DER-encoded Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS) {{RFC5652}} for
this purpose.

Creating a MUD file signature
-----------------------------
A MUD file MUST be signed using CMS as an opaque binary object.  In
order to make successful verification more likely, intermediate
certificates SHOULD be included.  The signature is stored at the
location specified in the MUD file.  Signatures are
transferred using content-type "application/pkcs7-signature".

For example:

~~~~~~~~~~
% openssl cms -sign -signer mancertfile -inkey mankey \
              -in mudfile -binary -outform DER -binary \
              -certfile intermediatecert -out mudfile.p7s
~~~~~~~~~~

Note: A MUD file may need to be re-signed if the signature expires.

Verifying a MUD file signature {#validate}
------------------------------ 
Prior to processing the rest of a MUD file, the MUD manager MUST
retrieve the MUD signature file by retrieving the value of
"mud-signature" and validating the signature across the MUD file. The
Key Usage Extension in the signing certificate MUST be present and
have the bit digitalSignature(0) set.  When the id-pe-mudsigner
extension is present in a device's X.509 certificate, the MUD
signature file MUST have been generated by a certificate whose subject
matches the contents of that id-pe-mudsigner extension.  If these
conditions are not met, or if it cannot validate the chain of trust to
a known trust anchor, the MUD manager MUST cease processing the MUD
file until an administrator has given approval.

The purpose of the signature on the file is to assign accountability
to an entity, whose reputation can be used to guide administrators on
whether or not to accept a given MUD file.  It is already common place
to check web reputation on the location of a server on which a file
resides.  While it is likely that the manufacturer will be the signer
of the file, this is not strictly necessary, and may not be desirable.
For one thing, in some environments, integrators may install their own
certificates.  For another, what is more important is the
accountability of the recommendation, and not just the relationship
between the Thing and the file.

An example:

~~~~~~~~~~
% openssl cms -verify -in mudfile.p7s -inform DER -content mudfile
~~~~~~~~~~

Note the additional step of verifying the common trust root.

Extensibility {#ext}
===========================

One of our design goals is to see that MUD files are able to be
understood by as broad a cross-section of systems as is possible.
Coupled with the fact that we have also chosen to leverage existing
mechanisms, we are left with no ability to negotiate extensions and a
limited desire for those extensions in any event.  A such, a
two-tier extensibility framework is employed, as follows:

 1. At a coarse grain, a protocol version is included in a MUD URL.
 This memo specifies MUD version 1.  Any and all changes are
 entertained when this version is bumped.  Transition approaches
 between versions would be a matter for discussion in future versions.

 2. At a finer grain, only extensions that would not incur additional
 risk to the Thing are permitted.  Specifically, adding nodes to the
 mud container is permitted with the understanding that such additions
 will be ignored by unaware implementations.  Any such extensions
 SHALL be standardized through the IETF process, and MUST be named in
 the "extensions" list.  MUD managers MUST ignore YANG nodes they
 do not understand and SHOULD create an exception to be resolved by an
 administrator, so as to avoid any policy inconsistencies.


Deployment Considerations {#depcon}
===================================

Because MUD consists of a number of architectural building blocks, it
is possible to assemble different deployment scenarios.  One key
aspect is where to place policy enforcement.  In order to protect the
Thing from other Things within a local deployment, policy can be
enforced on the nearest switch or access point.  In order to limit
unwanted traffic within a network, it may also be advisable to enforce
policy as close to the Internet as possible.  In some circumstances,
policy enforcement may not be available at the closest hop.  At that
point, the risk of lateral infection (infection of devices that reside
near one another) is increased to the number of Things that are able
to communicate without protection.

A caution about some of the classes: admission of a Thing into the
"manufacturer" and "same-manufacturer" class may have impact on access
of other Things.  Put another way, the admission may grow the
access-list on switches connected to other Things, depending on how
access is managed.  Some care should be given on managing that
access-list growth.  Alternative methods such as additional
network segmentation can be used to keep that growth within reason.

Because as of this writing MUD is a new concept, one can expect a
great many devices to not have implemented it.  It remains a local
deployment decision as to whether a device that is first connected
should be allowed broad or limited access.  Furthermore, as mentioned
in the introduction, a deployment may choose to ignore a MUD policy in
its entirety, but simply taken into account the MUD URL as a
classifier to be used as part of a local policy decision.

Finally, please see directly below regarding device lifetimes and use
of domain names.

Security Considerations {#secon}
=================================

Based on how a MUD URL is emitted, a Thing may be able to lie about
what it is, thus gaining additional network access.  This can happen
in a number of ways when a device emits a MUD URL using DHCP or LLDP,
such as being inappropriately admitted to a class such as
"same-manufacturer", given access to a device such as "my-controller",
or being permitted access to an Internet resource, where such access
would otherwise be disallowed.  Whether that is the case will depend
on the deployment.  Implementations SHOULD be configurable to disallow
additive access for devices using MUD-URLs that are not emitted in a
secure fashion such as in a certificate.  Similarly, implementations
SHOULD NOT grant elevated permissions (beyond those of devices
presenting no MUD policy) to devices which do not strongly bind their
identity to their L2/L3 transmissions.  When insecure methods are used
by the MUD Manager, the classes SHOULD NOT contain devices that use
both insecure and secure methods, in order to prevent privilege
escalation attacks, and MUST NOT contain devices with the same MUD-URL
that are derived from both strong and weak authentication methods.

Devices may forge source (L2/L3) information.  Deployments should
apply appropriate protections to bind communications to the
authentication that has taken place.  For 802.1X authentication, IEEE
802.1AE (MACsec) {{IEEE8021AE}} is one means by which this may happen.
A similar approach can be used with 802.11i (WPA2) {{IEEE80211i}}.
Other means are available with other lower layer technologies.
Implementations using session-oriented access that is not
cryptographically bound should take care to remove state when any form
of break in the session is detected.

A rogue CA may sign a certificate that contains the same subject name
as is listed in the MUDsigner field in the manufacturer certificate,
thus seemingly permitting a substitute MUD file for a device.  There
are two mitigations available: first, if the signer changes, this may
be flagged as an exception by the MUD manager.  If the MUD file also
changes, the MUD manager SHOULD seek administrator approval (it should
do this in any case).  In all circumstances, the MUD manager MUST
maintain a cache of trusted CAs for this purpose.  When such a rogue
is discovered, it SHOULD be removed.

Additional mitigations are described below.

When certificates are not present, Things claiming to be of a certain
manufacturer SHOULD NOT be included in that manufacturer grouping
without additional validation of some form.  This will be relevant
whenthe MUD manager makes use of primitives such as "manufacturer" for
the purpose of accessing Things of a particular type.  Similarly,
network management systems may be able to fingerprint the Thing.  In
such cases, the MUD URL can act as a classifier that can be proven or
disproven.  Fingerprinting may have other advantages as well: when
802.1AR certificates are used, because they themselves cannot change,
fingerprinting offers the opportunity to add artifacts to the MUD
string in the form of the reserved field discussed in {{dhcpopt}}.
The meaning of such artifacts is left as future work.

MUD managers SHOULD NOT accept a usage description for a Thing with
the same MAC address that has indicated a change of the URL authority
without some additional validation (such as review by a network
administrator).  New Things that present some form of unauthenticated
MUD URL SHOULD be validated by some external means when they would be
be given increased network access.

It may be possible for a rogue manufacturer to inappropriately
exercise the MUD file parser, in order to exploit a vulnerability.
There are three recommended approaches to address this threat.  The
first is to validate that the signer of the MUD file is known to and
trusted by the MUD manager.  The second is to have a system do a
primary scan of the file to ensure that it is both parseable and
believable at some level.  MUD files will likely be relatively small,
to start with.  The number of ACEs used by any given Thing should be
relatively small as well.  It may also be useful to limit retrieval of
MUD URLs to only those sites that are known to have decent web or
domain reputations.

Use of a URL necessitates the use of domain names.  If a domain name
changes ownership, the new owner of that domain may be able to provide
MUD files that MUD managers would consider valid.  There are a few
approaches that can mitigate this attack.  First, MUD managers
SHOULD cache certificates used by the MUD file server.  When a new
certificate is retrieved for whatever reason, the MUD manager
should check to see if ownership of the domain has changed.  A fair
programmatic approximation of this is when the name servers for the
domain have changed.  If the actual MUD file has changed, the
MUD manager MAY check the WHOIS database to see if registration
ownership of a domain has changed.  If a change has occurred, or if for
some reason it is not possible to determine whether ownership has
changed, further review may be warranted.  Note, this remediation does
not take into account the case of a Thing that was produced long ago
and only recently fielded, or the case where a new MUD manager has
been installed.

The release of a MUD URL by a Thing reveals what the Thing is, and
provides an attacker with guidance on what vulnerabilities may be
present.

While the MUD URL itself is not intended to be unique to a specific
Thing, the release of the URL may aid an observer in identifying
individuals when combined with other information.  This is a privacy
consideration.

In addressing both of these concerns, implementors should take into
account what other information they are advertising through mechanisms
such as mDNS{{RFC6872}}, how a Thing might otherwise be identified,
perhaps through how it behaves when it is connected to the network,
whether a Thing is intended to be used by individuals or carry
personal identifying information, and then apply appropriate data
minimization techniques.  One approach is to make use of TEAP
{{RFC7170}} as the means to share information with authorized
components in the network.  Network elements may also assist in
limiting access to the MUD URL through the use of mechanisms such as
DHCPv6-Shield {{RFC7610}}.

There is the risk of the MUD manager itself being spied on to
determine what things are connected to the network.  To address this
risk, MUD managers may choose to make use of TLS proxies that they
trust that would aggregate other information.

Please note that the security considerations mentioned in Section 4.7
of {{I-D.ietf-netmod-rfc6087bis}} are not applicable in this case
because the YANG serialization is not intended to be accessed via
NETCONF.  However, for those who try to instantiate this model in a
network element via NETCONF, all objects in each model in this draft
exhibit similar security characteristics as
{{I-D.ietf-netmod-acl-model}}.  The basic purpose of MUD is to
configure access, and so by its very nature can be disruptive if used
by unauthorized parties.


IANA Considerations
===================

\[ There was originally a registry entry for .well-known suffixes.
  This has been removed from the draft and may be marked as deprecated
  in the registry. RFC Editor: please remove this comment. \]

   
YANG Module Registrations
-------------------------
The following YANG modules are requested to be registered in the "IANA
Module Names" registry:

The ietf-mud module:

- Name: ietf-mud
- URN: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-mud
- Prefix: ietf-mud
- Registrant conact: The IESG
- Reference: [RFCXXXX]

The ietf-acldns module:

- Name: ietf-acldns
- URI: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-acldns
- Prefix: ietf-acldns
- Registrant: the IESG
- Reference: [RFCXXXX]



DHCPv4 and DHCPv6 Options
-------------------------

The IANA has allocated option 161 in the Dynamic Host Configuration
Protocol (DHCP) and Bootstrap Protocol (BOOTP) Parameters registry for
the MUD DHCPv4 option, and option 112 for DHCPv6, as described in {{dhcpopt}}.


PKIX Extensions
---------------

IANA is kindly requested to make the   following assignments for:

 o The MUDURLExtnModule-2016 ASN.1 module in the "SMI Security for
   PKIX Module Identifier" registry (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.0).

 o id-pe-mud-url object identifier from the "SMI Security for PKIX
   Certificate Extension" registry (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.1).

 o id-pe-mudsigner object identifier from the "SMI Security for
   PKIX Certificate Extension" registry (TBD).

 o id-ct-mud object identifier from the "SMI Security for S/MIME CMS
   Content Type" registry.

The use of these values is specified in {{mudx509}}.


MIME Media-type Registration for MUD files
------------------------------------------

The following media-type is defined for transfer of MUD file:

~~~~~~~~~~
 o Type name: application
 o Subtype name: mud+json
 o Required parameters: n/a
 o Optional parameters: n/a
 o Encoding considerations: 8bit; application/mud+json values
   are represented as a JSON object; UTF-8 encoding MUST be
   employed. [RFC3629]
 o Security considerations: See Security Considerations
   of RFCXXXX and [RFC8259] Section 12.
 o Interoperability considerations: n/a
 o Published specification: [RFCXXXX]
 o Applications that use this media type: MUD managers as
   specified by [RFCXXXX].
 o Fragment identifier considerations: n/a
 o Additional information:

     Magic number(s): n/a
     File extension(s): n/a
     Macintosh file type code(s): n/a

 o Person & email address to contact for further information:
   Eliot Lear <lear@cisco.com>, Ralph Droms <rdroms@gmail.com>
 o Intended usage: COMMON
 o Restrictions on usage: none
 o Author:
      Eliot Lear <lear@cisco.com>
      Ralph Droms <rdroms@gmail.com>
 o Change controller: IESG
 o Provisional registration? (standards tree only): No.

~~~~~~~~~~

LLDP IANA TLV Subtype Registry
------------------------------

IANA is requested to create a new registry for IANA Link Layer
Discovery Protocol (LLDP) TLV subtype values. The recommended policy
for this registry is Expert Review. The maximum number of entries in
the registry is 256.

IANA is required to populate the initial registry with the value:

LLDP subtype value = 1
(All the other 255 values should be initially marked as 'Unassigned'.)

Description = the Manufacturer Usage Description (MUD) Uniform Resource Locator (URL)

Reference = < this document >

The MUD Well Known Universal Resource Name (URNs) {#urns}
---------------------------------------------------------
The following parameter registry is requested to be added in
accordance with {{RFC3553}}

~~~~~
   Registry name: "urn:ietf:params:mud" is requested.
   Specification: this document
   Repository: this document
   Index value:  Encoded identically to a TCP/UDP port service
                 name, as specified in Section 5.1 of [RFC6335]
~~~~~

The following entries should be added to the "urn:ietf:params:mud" name space:

"urn:ietf:params:mud:dns" refers to the service specified by {{RFC1123}}.
"urn:ietf:params:mud:ntp" refers to the service specified by {{RFC5905}}.

Extensions Registry
-------------------
The IANA is requested to establish a registry of extensions as follows:

~~~~~
   Registry name: MUD extensions registry
   Registry policy: Standards action
   Standard reference: document
   Extension name: UTF-8 encoded string, not to exceed 40 characters.
~~~~~

Each extension MUST follow the rules specified in this specification.
As is usual, the IANA issues early allocations based in accordance
with {{RFC7120}}.


Acknowledgments
===============

The authors would like to thank Einar Nilsen-Nygaard, who
singlehandedly updated the model to match the updated ACL model,
Bernie Volz, Tom Gindin, Brian Weis, Sandeep Kumar, Thorsten Dahm,
John Bashinski, Steve Rich, Jim Bieda, Dan Wing, Joe Clarke, Henk
Birkholz, Adam Montville, Jim Schaad, and Robert Sparks for their
valuable advice and reviews.  Russ Housley entirely rewrote
{{mudx509}} to be a complete module.  Adrian Farrel provided the basis
for privacy considerations text.  Kent Watsen provided a thorough
review of the architecture and the YANG model.  The remaining errors
in this work are entirely the responsibility of the authors.

--- back

Changes from Earlier Versions
=============================

RFC Editor to remove this section prior to publication.

Draft -19:
 * Edits after discussion with apps area to address reserved
   field for the future.
 * Correct systeminfo to be utf8.
 * Remove "hardware-rev" from list.


Draft -18:
 * Correct an error in the augment statement
 * Changes to the ACL model re ports.

Draft -17:

 * One editorial.

Draft -16

 * add mud-signature element based on review comments
 * redo mud-url
 * make clear that systeminfo uses UTF8


Draft -13 to -14:

 * Final WGLC comments and review comments
 * Move version from MUD-URL to Model
 * Have MUD-URL in model
 * Update based on update to draft-ietf-netmod-acl-model
 * Point to tree diagram draft instead of 6087bis.

Draft -12 to -13:

 * Additional WGLC comments

Draft -10 to -12:

These are based on WGLC comments:

 * Correct examples based on ACL model changes.
 * Change ordering nodes.
 * Additional explanatory text around systeminfo.
 * Change ordering in examples.
 * Make it VERY VERY VERY VERY clear that these are recommendations,
   not mandates.
 * DHCP -> NTP in some of the intro text.
 * Remove masa-server
 * "Things" to "network elements" in a few key places.
 * Reference to JSON YANG RFC added.


Draft -10 to -11:

 * Example corrections
 * Typo
 * Fix two lists.
 * Addition of 'any-acl' and 'mud-acl' in the list of allowed features.
 * Clarification of what should be in a MUD file.


Draft -09 to -10:

 * AD input.
 * Correct dates.
 * Add compliance sentence as to which ACL module features are implemented.

Draft -08 to -09:

 * Resolution of Security Area review, IoT directorate review,
   GenART review, YANG doctors review.
 * change of YANG structure to address mandatory nodes.
 * Terminology cleanup.
 * specify out extra portion of MUD-URL.
 * consistency changes.
 * improved YANG descriptions.
 * Remove extra revisions.
 * Track ACL model changes.
 * Additional cautions on use of ACL model; further clarifications
   on extensions.

Draft -07 to -08:

 * a number of editorials corrected.
 * definition of MUD file tweaked.

Draft -06 to -07:

 * Examples updated.
 * Additional clarification for direction-initiated.
 * Additional implementation guidance given.


Draft -06 to -07:

 * Update models to match new ACL model
 * extract directionality from the ACL, introducing a new device container.


Draft -05 to -06:

 * Make clear that this is a component architecture (Polk and Watson)
 * Add order of operations (Watson)
 * Add extensions leaf-list (Pritikin)
 * Remove previous-mud-file (Watson)
 * Modify text in last-update (Watson)
 * Clarify local networks (Weis, Watson)
 * Fix contact info (Watson)
 * Terminology clarification (Weis)
 * Advice on how to handle LDevIDs (Watson)
 * Add deployment considerations (Watson)
 * Add some additional text about fingerprinting (Watson)
 * Appropriate references to 6087bis (Watson)
 * Change systeminfo to a URL to be referenced (Lear)

Draft -04 to -05:
 * syntax error correction

Draft -03 to -04:
 * Re-add my-controller

Draft -02 to -03:
 * Additional IANA updates
 * Format correction in YANG.
 * Add reference to TEAP.

Draft -01 to -02:
 * Update IANA considerations
 * Accept Russ Housley rewrite of X.509 text
 * Include privacy considerations text
 * Redo the URL limit.  Still 255 bytes, but now stated in the URL definition.
 * Change URI registration to be under urn:ietf:params

Draft -00 to -01:
 * Fix cert trust text.
 * change supportInformation to meta-info
 * Add an informational element in.
 * add urn registry and create first entry
 * add default elements


Default MUD nodes {#defaults}
====================

What follows is the portion of a MUD file that permits DNS traffic to
a controller that is registered with the URN "urn:ietf:params:mud:dns"
and traffic NTP to a controller that is registered
"urn:ietf:params:mud:ntp".  This is considered the default behavior
and the ACEs are in effect appended to whatever other "ace" entries
that a MUD file contains.  To block DNS or NTP one repeats the
matching statement but replaces the "forwarding" action "accept" with
"drop".  Because ACEs are processed in the order they are received,
the defaults would not be reached.  A MUD manager might further
decide to optimize to simply not include the defaults when they are
overridden.

Four "acl" list entries that implement default MUD nodes are listed
below.  Two are for IPv4 and two are for IPv6 (one in each direction
for both versions of IP).  Note that neither access-list name nor ace
name need be retained or used in any way by local implementations, but
are simply there for completeness' sake.

~~~~~~~~~~
 "ietf-access-control-list:acls": {
    "acl": [
      {
        "name": "mud-59776-v4to",
        "type": "ipv4-acl-type",
        "aces": {
          "ace": [
            {
              "name": "ent0-todev",
              "matches": {
                "ietf-mud:mud": {
                  "controller": "urn:ietf:params:mud:dns"
                },
                "ipv4": {
                  "protocol": 17
                },
                "udp": {
                  "source-port": {
                    "operator": "eq",
                    "port": 53
                  }
                }
              },
              "actions": {
                "forwarding": "accept"
              }
            },
            {
              "name": "ent1-todev",
              "matches": {
                "ietf-mud:mud": {
                  "controller": "urn:ietf:params:mud:ntp"
                },
                "ipv4": {
                  "protocol": 17
                },
                "udp": {
                  "source-port": {
                    "operator": "eq",
                    "port": 123
                  }
                }
              },
              "actions": {
                "forwarding": "accept"
              }
            }
          ]
        }
      },
      {
        "name": "mud-59776-v4fr",
        "type": "ipv4-acl-type",
        "aces": {
          "ace": [
            {
              "name": "ent0-frdev",
              "matches": {
                "ietf-mud:mud": {
                  "controller": "urn:ietf:params:mud:dns"
                },
                "ipv4": {
                  "protocol": 17
                },
                "udp": {
                  "destination-port": {
                    "operator": "eq",
                    "port": 53
                  }
                }
              },
              "actions": {
                "forwarding": "accept"
              }
            },
            {
              "name": "ent1-frdev",
              "matches": {
                "ietf-mud:mud": {
                  "controller": "urn:ietf:params:mud:ntp"
                },
                "ipv4": {
                  "protocol": 17
                },
                "udp": {
                  "destination-port": {
                    "operator": "eq",
                    "port": 123
                  }
                }
              },
              "actions": {
                "forwarding": "accept"
              }
            }
          ]
        }
      },
      {
        "name": "mud-59776-v6to",
        "type": "ipv6-acl-type",
        "aces": {
          "ace": [
            {
              "name": "ent0-todev",
              "matches": {
                "ietf-mud:mud": {
                  "controller": "urn:ietf:params:mud:dns"
                },
                "ipv6": {
                  "protocol": 17
                },
                "udp": {
                  "source-port": {
                    "operator": "eq",
                    "port": 53
                  }
                }
              },
              "actions": {
                "forwarding": "accept"
              }
            },
            {
              "name": "ent1-todev",
              "matches": {
                "ietf-mud:mud": {
                  "controller": "urn:ietf:params:mud:ntp"
                },
                "ipv6": {
                  "protocol": 17
                },
                "udp": {
                  "source-port": {
                    "operator": "eq",
                    "port": 123
                  }
                }
              },
              "actions": {
                "forwarding": "accept"
              }
            }
          ]
        }
      },
      {
        "name": "mud-59776-v6fr",
        "type": "ipv6-acl-type",
        "aces": {
          "ace": [
            {
              "name": "ent0-frdev",
              "matches": {
                "ietf-mud:mud": {
                  "controller": "urn:ietf:params:mud:dns"
                },
                "ipv6": {
                  "protocol": 17
                },
                "udp": {
                  "destination-port": {
                    "operator": "eq",
                    "port": 53
                  }
                }
              },
              "actions": {
                "forwarding": "accept"
              }
            },
            {
              "name": "ent1-frdev",
              "matches": {
                "ietf-mud:mud": {
                  "controller": "urn:ietf:params:mud:ntp"
                },
                "ipv6": {
                  "protocol": 17
                },
                "udp": {
                  "destination-port": {
                    "operator": "eq",
                    "port": 123
                  }
                }
              },
              "actions": {
                "forwarding": "accept"
              }
            }
          ]
        }
      }
    ]
  }

~~~~~~~~~~

A Sample Extension: DETNET-indicator {#extexample}
==================================================

In this sample extension we augment the core MUD model to indicate
whether the device implements DETNET.  If a device claims not to use
DETNET, but then later attempts to do so, a notification or exception
might be generated.  Note that this example is intended only for
illustrative purposes.

~~~~~~~~~~

Extension Name: "Example-Extension" (to be used in the extensions list)
Standard: this document (but do not register the example)

~~~~~~~~~~

This extension augments the MUD model to include a single node,
using the following sample module that has the following tree
structure:

~~~~~~~~~~

module: ietf-mud-detext-example
  augment /ietf-mud:mud:
    +--rw is-detnet-required?   boolean

~~~~~~~~~~

The model is defined as follows:

~~~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>file "ietf-mud-detext-example@2018-06-05.yang"
module ietf-mud-detext-example {
  yang-version 1.1;
  namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-mud-detext-example";
  prefix ietf-mud-detext-example;

  import ietf-mud {
    prefix ietf-mud;
  }

  organization
    "IETF OPSAWG (Ops Area) Working Group";
  contact
    "WG Web: http://tools.ietf.org/wg/opsawg/
     WG List: opsawg@ietf.org
     Author: Eliot Lear
     lear@cisco.com
     Author: Ralph Droms
     rdroms@gmail.com
     Author: Dan Romascanu
     dromasca@gmail.com
     
    ";
  description
    "Sample extension to a MUD module to indicate a need
     for DETNET support.";

  revision 2018-06-05 {
    description
      "Initial revision.";
    reference
      "RFC XXXX: Manufacturer Usage Description
       Specification";
  }

  augment "/ietf-mud:mud" {
    description
      "This adds a simple extension for a manufacturer
        to indicate whether DETNET is required by a
       device.";
    leaf is-detnet-required {
      type boolean;
      description
        "This value will equal true if a device requires
         detnet to properly function";
    }
  }
}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~~~

Using the previous example, we now show how the extension would be
expressed:

~~~~~~~~~~

{
  "ietf-mud:mud": {
    "mud-version": 1,
    "mud-url": "https://lighting.example.com/lightbulb2000",
    "last-update": "2018-03-02T11:20:51+01:00",
    "cache-validity": 48,
    "extensions": [
        "ietf-mud-detext-example"
     ],
    "ietf-mud-detext-example:is-detnet-required": "false",
    "is-supported": true,
    "systeminfo": "The BMS Example Lightbulb",
    "from-device-policy": {
      "access-lists": {
        "access-list": [
          {
            "name": "mud-76100-v6fr"
          }
        ]
      }
    },
    "to-device-policy": {
      "access-lists": {
        "access-list": [
          {
            "name": "mud-76100-v6to"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  },
  "ietf-access-control-list:acls": {
    "acl": [
      {
        "name": "mud-76100-v6to",
        "type": "ipv6-acl-type",
        "aces": {
          "ace": [
            {
              "name": "cl0-todev",
              "matches": {
                "ipv6": {
                  "ietf-acldns:src-dnsname": "test.example.com",
                  "protocol": 6
                },
                "tcp": {
                  "ietf-mud:direction-initiated": "from-device",
                  "source-port": {
                    "operator": "eq",
                    "port": 443
                  }
                }
              },
              "actions": {
                "forwarding": "accept"
              }
            }
          ]
        }
      },
      {
        "name": "mud-76100-v6fr",
        "type": "ipv6-acl-type",
        "aces": {
          "ace": [
            {
              "name": "cl0-frdev",
              "matches": {
                "ipv6": {
                  "ietf-acldns:dst-dnsname": "test.example.com",
                  "protocol": 6
                },
                "tcp": {
                  "ietf-mud:direction-initiated": "from-device",
                  "destination-port": {
                    "operator": "eq",
                    "port": 443
                  }
                }
              },
              "actions": {
                "forwarding": "accept"
              }
            }
          ]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}

~~~~~~~~~~
